Add 3.3 release and what's new (#4663)
tarantool/doc: doc/release/3.3.0.rst

Tarantool 3.3
=============

Release date: November 29, 2024

Releases on GitHub: :tarantool-release:`3.3.0`

The 3.3 release of Tarantool adds the following main product features and improvements for the Community and Enterprise editions:

*   **Community Edition (CE)**

    *   Improvements around queries with offsets.

>     *   Improvement in Raft implementation.

Reviewer: (Here and same term below) I see 2 ways of capitalization for Raft in the doc: Raft and RAFT. 
https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/search/?q=raft 
All caps seems more popular -- and "more correct" as for me.

Author: I've checked the [Raft website](https://raft.github.io/), [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)), and some [docs from software vendors](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/architecture/consensus), and haven't seen the all caps spelling. Sticking to the original (Raft website) is usually correct.

Reviewer: Would be nice to ask our devs to update log messages then: they mostly say "RAFT".

    *   Persistent replication state.

>     *   New C API for sending work to the TX thread.

Reviewer 2: I'd add '... from user threads.'

*   **Enterprise Edition (EE)**

>     *   Offset-related improvements in read views.

Reviewer 3: Should the newly added features be here as well?

.. _3-3-features-for-developers:

Developing applications
-----------------------

* JSON-схема для кластерного конфига.
* В ролях появился коллбек on_event для реакции на RO/RW.

> * Возможность поднять или убрать алерт из роли или приложения.

Reviewer 3: Is it something temporary?

Developing applications
-----------------------

.. _3-3-offset:

Improved offset processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tarantool 3.3 brings a number of improvements around queries with offsets.

-   The performance of tree index :ref:`select() <box_index-select>` with offset and
    :ref:`count() <box_index-count>` methods was improved.
    Previously, the algorithm complexity had a linear dependency on the
    provided offset size (``O(offset)``) or the number of tuples to count. Now,
    the new algorithm complexity is ``O(log(size))`` where ``size`` is the number of tuples
    in the index. This change also eliminates the dependency on the offset value or

>     the number of tuple to count.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the number of tuples to count.
```

> -   The :ref:`index <box_index>` and :ref:`space <box_space>` entities get the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The :ref:`index <box_index>` and :ref:`space <box_space>` entities get a new
```

    .. code-block:: lua

        -- index: {{1}, {3}}
        index:offset_of({3}, {iterator = 'eq'})  -- returns 1: [1, <3>]
        index:offset_of({3}, {iterator = 'req'}) -- returns 0: [<3>, 1]

-   The ``offset`` parameter has been added to the :ref:`index:pairs() <box_index-pairs>` method,
    allowing to skip the first tuples in the iterator.

Same improvements are also introduced to :ref:`read views <read_views>` in the Enterprise Edition.

-   Improved performance of the tree index read view ``select()`` with offset.
-   A new ``offset_of()`` method of index read views.
-   A new ``offset`` parameter in the ``index_read_view:pairs()`` method.

.. _3-3-sync-no-timeout:

No rollback on timeout for synchronous transactions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To better match the canonical Raft algorithm design, Tarantool no longer rolls
back synchronous transactions on timeout (upon reaching :ref:`replication.synchro_timeout <cfg_replication-replication_synchro_timeout>`).
In the new implementation, transactions can only be rolled back by a new leader after it is elected.
Otherwise, they can wait for a quorum infinitely.

> Given that this changes the behavior, a new ``replication_synchro_timeout`` :ref:`compat <compat-module>` option is introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given this change in behavior, a new ``replication_synchro_timeout`` :ref:`compat <compat-module>` option is introduced.
```

To try the new behavior, set this option to ``new``:

-   In YAML configuration:

    ..  code-block:: yaml

        compat:
          replication_synchro_timeout: new

-   In Lua code:

    ..  code-block:: tarantoolsession

        tarantool> require('compat').replication_synchro_timeout = 'new'
        ---
        ...

> There is also the new ``replication.synchro_queue_max_size`` configuration option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a new ``replication.synchro_queue_max_size`` configuration option
```

> that limits the total size of transactions in the master synchronous queue. By default,
> it's 16 megabytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that limits the total size of transactions in the master synchronous queue. The default
value is 16 megabytes.
```

.. _3-3-c-api-tx-thread:

C API for sending work to TX thread
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The new public C API functions ``tnt_tx_push()`` and ``tnt_tx_flush()``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New public C API functions ``tnt_tx_push()`` and ``tnt_tx_flush()``
```

allow to send work to the :ref:`TX thread <thread_model>` from any other thread:

-   ``tnt_tx_push()`` schedules the given callback to be executed with the provided
    arguments.

> -   ``tnt_tx_flush()`` sends all the pending callback for execution in the TX thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   ``tnt_tx_flush()`` sends all pending callbacks for execution in the TX thread.
```

>     The execution is started in the same order as the callbacks were pushed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Execution is started in the same order as the callbacks were pushed.
```

A schema lists configuration options of a certain Tarantool version with descriptions.
As of Tarantool 3.3 release date, the following versions are available:

-   `3.0.0 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.0.0.json>`__
-   `3.0.1 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.0.1.json>`__
-   `3.0.2 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.0.2.json>`__
-   `3.1.0 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.1.0.json>`__
-   `3.1.1 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.1.1.json>`__
-   `3.1.2 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.1.2.json>`__
-   `3.2.0 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.2.0.json>`__
-   `3.2.1 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.2.1.json>`__
-   `3.3.0 <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.3.0.json>`__

Additionally, there is the `latest <https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.json>`__
schema that reflects the latest configuration schema in development (master branch).

> Use these schemas to add completion for YAML configuration files and get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use these schemas to add code completion for YAML configuration files and get
```

.. code-block:: console

>     $ check-jsonschema --schemafile https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.3.0.json config.yaml

Reviewer 3: Ability to check user's config is good, but what is really nice: we can add this schema into an IDE's YAML plugin that supports JSON Schemas (at least for VSCode has one) and get completion for the options and hints with the documentation.

This is more important for UX than the validation. I would include both scenarios, but if we have place only for one, let's drop the `check-jsonschema` one.

.. code-block:: console

    $ check-jsonschema --schemafile https://download.tarantool.org/tarantool/schema/config.schema.3.3.0.json config.yaml

There is also a new API for generating the JSON configuration schema as a Lua table --
the ``config:jsonschema()`` function.

.. _3-3-roles-on-event:

on_event callbacks in roles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now :ref:`application roles <application_roles>` can have ``on_event`` callbacks.
They are executed every time a ``box.status`` :ref:`system event <system-events>` is

> broadcasted or the configuration is updated. The callback has three arguments:

Reviewer: I see that in the doc we opted for "broadcast", not "broadcasted" as the verb's 2nd and 3rd forms: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/search/?q=broadcasted

Author: Thanks, I didn't know that this second form is also correct.

-   ``config`` -- the current configuration.
-   ``key`` -- an event that has triggered the callback: ``config.apply`` or ``box.status``.

> -   ``value`` -- is the value of the ``box.status`` :ref:`system event <system-events>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   ``value`` -- the value of the ``box.status`` :ref:`system event <system-events>`.
```

    return {
        name = 'my_role',
        validate = function() end,
        apply = function() end,
        stop = function() end,
        on_event = function(config, key, value)
            local log = require('log')

            log.info('on_event is triggered by ' .. key)
            log.info('is_ro: ' .. value.is_ro)
            log.info('roles_cfg.my_role.foo: ' .. config.foo)
        end,
    }

.. _3-3-alert-api:

API for raising alerts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now developers can raise their own alerts from their application or application roles.
For this purpose, a new API is introduced into the ``config`` module.

The ``config:new_alerts_namespace()`` function creates a new
*alerts namespace* -- a named container for user-defined alerts:

.. code-block:: lua

    local config = require('config')
    local alerts = config:new_alerts_namespace('my_alerts')

Alerts namespaces provides methods for managing alerts within them. All user-defined
alerts raised in all namespaces are shown in ``box.info.config.alerts``.

To raise an alert, use the namespace methods ``add`` or ``set``:
The difference between them is that ``set()`` accepts a key to use as an alert

> identifier for further operations. An alert must be a table; it's ``message`` field is logged.

Reviewer 3: > The difference between them is that `set()` accepts a key to use as an alert identifier for further operations.

The key point behind `set()` is that you can raise an alert several times with the same key, but only the last one is saved. Ability to call `unset()` later is a good thing, but it seems less important.

To raise an alert, use the namespace methods ``add()`` or ``set()``:
The difference between them is that ``set()`` accepts a key to refer to the alert

> later: overwrite or discard it. An alert is a table with one mandatory  field ``message``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
later: overwrite or discard it. An alert is a table with one mandatory field ``message``
```

    -- Raise a new alert.
    alerts:add({
        message = 'Test alert',
        my_field = 'my_value',
    })

    -- Raise a new alert with a key.
    alerts:set("my_alert", {
        message = 'Test alert',
        my_field = 'my_value',
    })

You can discard alerts individually by keys using the ``unset()`` method, or
all at once using ``clear()``:

.. code-block:: lua

    alerts:unset("my_alert")
    alerts:clear()

.. _3-3-administration-and-maintenance:

Administration and maintenance
------------------------------

.. _3-3-upgrade-ddl:

DDL before upgrade
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Апгрейд лишился ограничений на DDL по сравнению с версиями 3.0, 3.1, 3.2.
Это позволяет, например, выдать права на функции до вызова box.schema.upgrade()..

Tarantool now allows DDL operations before calling ``box.schema.upgrade()`` during

> an upgrade from an earlier version. For example, you can

Reviewer 3: It seems, this section is not finished.

during an upgrade if the source schema version is 2.11.1 or later. This allows,
for example, granting execute access to user-defined functions in the cluster configuration
before the schema is upgraded.

.. _3-3-isolated-instances:

Isolated instances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new instance-level configuration option ``isolated`` puts an instance into the
*isolated* mode. In this mode, an instance doesn't accept updates from other members

> of its replica set and other iproto requests. It also doesn't perform background

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of its replica set and other iproto requests. It also performs no background
```

      group-001:
        replicasets:
          replicaset-001:
            instances:
              instance-001: {}
              instance-002: {}
              instance-003:
                isolated: true

In this mode, an instance doesn't accept updates from other members of its replicaset
and other iproto requests. It also doesn't perform background data modifications
and remains in read-only mode.

Use the isolated mode to temporarily isolate instances for maintenance, debugging,
or other actions that should not affect other cluster instances.

.. _3-3-replica-unregister:

Automatic expulsion configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new configuration section ``replication.autoexpel`` allows to automatically expel

> instances after they are removed from the YAML configuration.

Reviewer 3: It is OK to use `expulse` and `expel` both? I would attempt to use one term for one feature.

Author: Most dictionaries state that `expulsion` is the noun form of `expel` (a surprise for me), so it's the same term.

Reviewer 3: Hm, OK so.

.. code-block:: yaml

    replication:
      autoexpel:
        enabled: true
        by: prefix
        prefix: '{{ replicaset_name }}'

The section includes three options:

-   ``enabled``: whether automatic expulsion logic is enabled in the cluster.
-   ``by``: a criterion for selecting instances that can be expelled automatically.
    In version 3.3, the only available criterion is ``prefix``.
-   ``prefix``: a prefix with which an instance name should start to make automatic expulsion possible.

.. note::

>     Automatic expulsion happens after a :ref:`configuration reload <config_api_reference_reload>`.

Reviewer 3: From the [commit message](https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/commit/b2c11535d87d4cb0e9c02fbe53d57887f8887fcd):

> The autoexpel logic works on startup and reacts on the reconfiguration and the `box.status` watcher event.

If we say that it reacts on reload, it is incomplete and may confuse. Maybe better to say nothing in such a brief description.

.. _3-3-lua-memory-size:

Lua memory size
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new configuration option ``lua.memory`` specifies the maximum amount of memory
for Lua scripts execution, in bytes. For example, this configuration sets the Lua memory limit to 2 GB:

.. code-block:: yaml

    lua:

>         memory: 2147483648

Reviewer 3: This is the default, so there is no sense to set the limit to 2GiB. We can given an example that reduces the limit or uplifts it.

The default limit is 2 GB.

.. _3-3-supervised-failover-improvements:

Supervised failover improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tarantool 3.3 is receiving a number of supervised failover improvements:

*   Support for Tarantool-based :ref:`stateboard <supervised_failover_overview_fault_tolerance>`
    as an alternative to etcd.
*   Instance priority configuration: new ``failover.priority`` configuration section.
    This section specify the instances' relative order of being appointed by a coordinator:
    bigger values mean higher priority.

    .. code-block:: yaml

        failover:
          replicasets:
            replicaset-001:
              priority:
                instance-001: 5
                instance-002: -5
                instance-003: 4

>     Additionally, there is ``failover.learners`` section that lists instances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Additionally, there is a ``failover.learners`` section that lists instances
```

    that should never be appointed as replica set leaders:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        failover:
          replicasets:
            replicaset-001:
              learners:
                - instance-004
                - instance-005

*   Automatic failover configuration update.
*   Failover logging configuration with new configuration options ``failover.log.to``
    and ``failover.log.file``:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        failover:
          log:
            to: file # or stderr
            file: var/log/tarantool/failover.log

> Learn more about supervised failover :ref:`repl_supervised_failover`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about supervised failover: :ref:`repl_supervised_failover`.
```

.. _3-3-persistent-wal-gc:

Persistent replication state
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tarantool :ref:`persistence mechanism <concepts-data_model-persistence>` uses
two types of files: snapshots and write-ahead log (WAL) files. These files are also used
for replication: read-only replicas receive data changes from the replica set leader
by reading these files.

> The :ref:`garbage collector <configuration_persistence_garbage_collector>` that
> cleans up obsolete snapshots and WAL files it doesn't remove the files while they
> are in use for replication. To make such a check possible, the replica set leaders

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`garbage collector <configuration_persistence_garbage_collector>`
cleans up obsolete snapshots and WAL files, but it doesn't remove the files while they
are in use for replication. To make such a check possible, the replica set leaders
```

store the replication state in connection with files. However, this information
was not persisted, which could lead to issues in case of the leader restart.
The garbage collector could delete WAL files after the restart even if there were
replicas that still read these files. The :ref:`wal.cleanup_delay <configuration_reference_wal_cleanup_delay>`
configuration option was used to prevent such situations.

Since version 3.3, leader instances persist the information about WAL files in use

> in the new system space ``_gc_consumers``. After a restart, the replication state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a new system space ``_gc_consumers``. After a restart, the replication state
```

Tarantool 3.3
=============

> Release date: November 30, 2024

Reviewer 3: It was released 29 Nov.

Author: Thanks, fixed
